Dance 648 European Roots of 20th Century Music: the ISMS
Spring, 2002

"So the twentieth century is that, it is a time when everything cracks, where everything is destroyed, everything isolates itself, it is a more splendid thing than a period where everything follows itself. So then, the twentieth century is a splendid period, not a reasonable one in the scientific sense, but splendid. The phenonema of nature are more splendid than the daily events of nature, certainly, so then the twentieth century is splendid."
from Picasso, by Gertrude Stein. 1938


THE MOST IMPORTANT POINTS:

Mini-mini overview of music history as relates to European "classical tradition"
 
I. Ancient World (ca. 600 B.C.E­400 A.D.)

Ancient Greece: Music, poetry, and dance are inseparable
Most tuning is in just intonation (

Pythagoras (c.560­c.480) is intitiated into mystical studies of music in Egypt and Babylon, and later creates diatonic scale (our DO RE MI FA SO LA TI DO)

Music is intended for higher purpose: to tune our own music (Musica Humana) with the ,usic of celestial bodies (Music of the Spheres)

Began long division between music for the mind vs. music for the senses
Other, competing scales existed: enharmonic (up to 18 steps an octave) and chromatic (white and black keys of our modern keyboards)

Gradual separation between music, poetry, and dance - much knowledge lost

II. Medieval (ca. 400­1400s A.D.)

St. Augustine (354­430 A.D) 

Christian Church takes up Pythagorean tuning and philosophy, music begins to take on divine quality

musici vs. cantores

Chant / Plainsong
Emerges in early Christian Church out of Jewish synagogue music and Greek theories
a capella
no accompaniment

by early 1000s, chromatic scale re-emerges, leads to development of polyphony, and Equal Temperament

III. Renaissance: 1420-1600
vocal and instrumental with instruments that are FORERUNNERS of modern ones
lutes, recorders
lots of imitation between parts
lots of counterpoint



IV. Baroque: ca. 1580-1790
consolidation of Equal Temperament
Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier
ongoing rhythm
lots of counterpoint

Rococo

V. Viennese Classical
late 18th century Mozart/Haydn/early Beethoven
simple, direct, elegant, lots of melody with background, 
supporting accompaniment, clear form


VI. Romanticism: 19th century 
BALLET MUSIC
drama, huge, lots of rubato and FEELING


VII. 20th century
1. Reaction to excesses of 19th century ROMANTICISM. (lush harmonies, huge orchestras, LONG pieces, beautiful soaring melodies, lots of "rubato" and feeling) to a breakdown of tonality and the opposite of these ideas.

2. Continuation of NATIONALISM idea begun in 19th century: composers exploring their cultural roots (including folk elements) 
Russian: Alexander Scriabin/Sergei Prokofiev/Dmitri Shostakovitch/Igor Stravinsky (also lived in Switzerland and France)
French: Claude Debussy/Maurice Ravel/Eric Satie/Francis Poulenc/Darius Milhaud/Gabriel Faure/Edgard Varese/Oliver Messiaen
Czechoslavakian: Leo Janacek
Hungarian: Bela Bartok/ Zoltan Kodaly/Ernst Dohnanyi
German: Carl Orff/ Paul Hindemith/Kurt Weill
Finland: Jean Sibelius
Italian: Luigi Dallapiccola
Spanish: Manuel de Falla
English: Benjamin Britten/Frederick Delius/Ralph Vaughn Williams
Austrian: Alban Berg/Arnold Schoenberg/Anton Webern
American: Samuel Barber/ Aaron Copland/ Henry Cowell/Charles Ives/John Cage/Harry Partch/Charles Griffes/Roy Harris/David Diamond/ Lou Harrison
Brazilian: Heitor Villa-Lobos
Mexican: Carlos Chavez/Silvestre Revueltas
Argentinian: Alberto Ginastera

THREE TRADITIONS: (See attached sheet)
1. German/Austrian
2. French/Italian/Russian
3. American Experimental

3. Effects of World Wars: WW I (1914-18) WW II (1939-45)
economic factors (Great Depression 1929) loss of "wealthy patron" idea/ loss of optimism /questioning art as a "moral" force
4. Technology influences / Einstein's theories
commercial radio +film (1920's)/ talking pictures and color film(1930's) first television (1926)
5. Psychology influences/Freud: unconscious mind
6. Issues of freedom (Russian Revolution: 1917)
7. Effects of global awareness (other cultures) 1889 Paris International Exposition
Debussy and others heard Indonesian gamelan
beginning of study of anthropology: other cultures no longer considered "primitive"
8. Effects of jazz/blues/ragtime (from 1890s) 
9. The ISMS (from visual art): impressionism, post-impressionism, dadaism, expressionism, abstract expressionism, cubism (planes penetrate each other as though space perceived at different moments in time simultaneously), interest in color and shape, psychological aspects

1. Impressionism (and the French sensibility) 
elegance, simplicity, feeling or emotion or sensual in contrast to highly intellectual ideas of Austria/Germany, "pleasure," clarity, charm

Impressionism (in painting): no lines, as if melting, paint only what visible at a given moment in a given "light", changes of light, out of doors and nature subjects, sun and shadow, overlapping strokes of pure color: Monet/Renoir/Cezanne/Degas 
symbolist poetry: Mallarme, Verlain, Rimbaud

LP3 2646 (cut 7) Debussy: Le Martyr de Saint Sebastian (Passion)..kind of music used for ballet...tells a story, but could set a mood or a theatrical idea.

Composers of French sensibility: Debussy, Ravel, Poulenc, Satie
LP3 3176 Satie: Danceries: Les Oiseaux from 3 Melodies Without Words

2. Expressionism: (THE ISMS) (not on listening list)
breakdown of tonality, harsh, intellectual, dissonant, neurotic, angst

(In painting): Klee (psychology of perception) From Dadaism (Arp) to Surrealism: Max Ernst  
Dadaism...traditional values in art and morality no longer applicable
Swiss artists ARP interested in chance effects, nonsense, meaningless poems in several languages
Expressionism: psychological factors Van Gogh: self portrait
Abstract Expressionism: non linear approach (Chagall, Klee) 
Cubism: (Picasso) interested in color, seeing different angles at the same time

*LP3 2943 Schoenberg: Pierrot Lunaire #1 Mondestruken #4 Eine Blasse Wascherin  (short/ intense/strange/sprechtstimme

*LP3 2172 Arnold Schoenberg: Variations ( #14) Serial, 12 tone technique (1920's) 

 "Either what we do is music‹or what the French do is music. Both cannot be music." (Arnold Schoenberg/Austrian composer) 

Idea of turning INWARD to interior psyhcological landscape, dreams, etc. VS. IMPRESSIONS of the external landscape, the senses responding to light, shade, wind, etc.

3. American Experimentalism (also a kind of Nationalism)

*LP3 2672 Henry Cowell: The Banshee (1925) ( played on inside of piano, developed tone clusters: playing with fists and forearms on piano)

*LP3 2970 John Cage:  Preludes and Interludes ( In piece called Baccanale, Cage used prepared piano for the first time for a dance score with choreographer Sylvia Forte in 1938 in Seattle) We will discuss this further in Asian influence section.

*LP3 0904 Charles Ives: Three Places in New England: Putnam Camp(1912) #2 dovetails two pieces: Overture and Country Band March polytonality, polyrhythmic, recognizeable American tunes 

LP3 0852 Aaron Copland: #10 From Our Town (film score)blues/jazz elements of brass 

 Nationalism/Folk roots: 
*LP3 0714 Bela Bartok: String Quartet #4 , 2nd Rondo (1928) , use of native Hungarian folk traditions and tunes, strong rhythmic ideas. (cut 5 and 6)

Stravinsky: Some say greatest GIANT of 20th Century music (1882-1971)
Russian living in Paris. Work with Diagalev and Ballet Russes (Satie, Picasso, Nijinsky and Pavlova): Firebire (1910, )Petrushka (1911) Rite of Spring(1913) riotous reaction of audience. As a composer, he dappled in many different kinds of approaches including Neo-Classic (Symphony of Psalms and L'Histoire du Soldat) and 12 tone (at age of 70! ) for Ballet "Agon" and jazz elements: Ragtime (1918) and Ebony Concerto for Woody Herman in 1945.

SOME FEATURES TO NOTICE IN 20th CENTURY MUSIC:

MELODY: Contours may be jagged, over a wide range OR centered on a set of repeated pitches. Key center may be absent (atonal or 12 tone, or serial) Melody is NOT so important in conveying form. Other elements, such as ostinato, a driving rhythm or a group of notes sounded together may create the motive, instead of a melodic idea.

RHYTHM: It is not so regular as in the past. Instead, it may be impulsive and thrusting or, the opposite: still and motionless. Irregular, mixed meters and syncopation are used often and explored by composers. Polyrhythms are explored.

HARMONY: It is much freer. Rules are broken. Chords move in unpredictable ways, chords are made not only of 3rds, but clusters, and other intervals. Several chords can sound at the same time and create bi-tonality or polytonality. Consonance and dissonance have new meaning and don't have to resolve (they might float or be brutal and static.) New scales are used (pentatonic, or other non-Western modes.)

TEXTURE: It has taken on new importance. There is a new interest in counterpoint. Densities can be extremely thick or very clear. Smaller is okay. 

TIMBRE: Color has become a major musical element. Composers have played instruments in different ways. The insides of piano, unusual bowing techniques, use of brass mutes, glissandi (sliding) and playing in the extreme registers of instruments are ways to get new sounds.  Percussion instruments are used often and not just in the background. (Beethoven's symphonies only had one simple drum (timpani) playing quarter notes.) Instruments are played percussively on purpose. Modern technology has begun to influence music: there are exotic sounds of sirens, whistles, and typewriters . New instruments: (saxophone: invented 1846, not really used until 1920's) 

AESTHETIC ATTITUDES: There is a flexibility in what is possible, from emotional intensity, to anti-romanticism, to satire and humor and pure pleasure or sensuality, to a kind of barbaric feeling.