EXIST


FIREXIT brings present-day forms of art, music, film, dance, activism, and
creativity into one space.  Within these walls, we hope to create a
positive environment where older, established forms can mutate, evolve,
and collide with each other in new ways; encouraging an open dialogue
between artists and audiences where all creative activities can be
experienced collectively.   Through FIREXIT, we hope to "exit" the old
structures, and build something new.

THE SPACE

The FIREXIT space is a converted warehouse / performance space / gallery /
studio / living space located at 1229 McKinley Ave.  Our current
relationship with the space leaser allows us to access four gallery rooms
(ranging from 144 sq. ft. to 650 sq. ft.) and two performance areas (650
sq. ft and 6500 sq. ft), each of which can be used for multiple purposes.
There are also living quarters for 5 people.  All donations made to this
space go towards paying space rental (which exceeds $1000 a month),
utilities (which exceed $500 a month), and improvements (lighting, paint,
sound, etc).  Donations do not benefit the apartment / living area.

THE PEOPLE

Currently, FIREXIT consists of about two dozen artists, musicians,
students, writers, activists, and contributors; drawn mainly from the CCAD
and OSU arts communities, plus their personal circles of friends and
collaborators.  

As a group, FIREXIT reflects the diverse personal interests of each
individual involved, linked by a general disappointment with the current
state of the arts in Columbus. 

As individuals, our interests include (but are not limited to): "outsider"
art; computer-aided collage art; mass media manipulation; sampled graphic
design; hardcore, independent, and post-rock; underground hip-hop; and
experimental electronic music (minimal techno, electro, drum'n'bass,
noise); as well as various issues of body- and self- awareness (dance,
vegetarianism, sexuality, fashion, etc).  Naturally, we hope to shape
FIREXIT into a community of people who share our concerns, but we also
want to encourage all creative individuals to feel empowered by what we
are trying to do.  


EXITBITION

tonight's itinerary


FUTUREXIT - upcoming events

FIREXIT events:

Fri July 2 - FIREXIT 11
w/ MAKEUP

ele_mental events

Sat June 5 - ACTIVE NOT PASSIVE 8.0
sound / body / environ_ment
sound by Matt Bailey, Matt Clausen 
dance performance by Mara Frazier, Aaron Henderson, Sarah Morris, 
environ_ment by


one-offs

Sat Jun 12 - PIXIES-ATHON
Tues July 11 - LOCUST


EXTEND

HOW TO CONTRIBUTE

There are several ways for  you to contribute to FIREXIT.  

If you would like to take part in the decision making process, you are
welcome to attend the FIREXIT administrative meetings, which are held
every Monday from 9 PM - 10 PM, at the space (1229 McKinley Ave, middle
door entrance).  We discuss details for upcoming shows, work out problems
and dilemmas, and talk about what direction we want FIREXIT to go.  

If you are an artist or musician, and you feel ready to bring your ideas
into a FIREXIT event, please leave your contact information on our sign-up
sheet (look for the metal "React" sign).  If possible, give us some idea
what kind of art or music you do, what kind of art or music you
appreciate, and what direction you want to go.  If you don't hear from us,
and you are determined to contribute, please seek us out.  FIREXIT is
mostly made up of people who are frustrated with how things are and want
to change them, so it's probably a good idea to be "active" in getting
ahold of us.

We are also open to proposals for alternative uses for the space.  If you
are an artist in need of temporary studio space, a dancer in need of a
large rehearsal space, or a musician in need of a practice space, please
contact us.  We want FIREXIT to be a place where everything can interact
on an equal level.

We are also considering turning FIREXIT into a more official entity or
business, so we are actively seeking help from anyone who knows anything
about small business management, non-profit organization and
administration, legal issues, other alternatives to fundraising, and so
on.  So if you have anything to offer, please contact us.

CONTACT

Matt Clausen
Dan McMahon
Scott Niemet
Rachel Weideger
Edward Luna
more?






